release.txt

                           MF2005-FMP2 Release Notes

This file describes changes introduced into MF2005-FMP2 with each
official release; these changes may substantially affect users. In this
file, packages are referred to by their 3-or 4-character abbreviation. 
For information and references related to earlier changes in MODFLOW-2005 
(Version 1.06.01), please refer to the MODFLOW-2005 release notes or the 
publicationons for these packages, see MF2005_FMP2.txt ("Summary of MF2005-FMP2").

NOTE: Any use of trade, product or firm names is for descriptive purposes 
      only and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Government.

o MF2005-FMP2 Version 1.0.00 This version is the initial release (MF-FMP2).

NOTES to Users:


(1) FARM PROCESS (FMP2):

  (A) FORTRAN: Double Precision, Explicit Variable Data Types, and Fortran90 --

Consistent with MF2005, MF2005_FMP2 maintains the mixed precision of single and double precision Real numbers. 
Modern Fortran compilers have an option to convert all Real(Kind=4) to Double Precision(Kind=8) without the need 
to modify the code (see REAME.TXT / E. COMPILING). While this conversion from a mixed precision to a double 
precision executable is relatively simple, it does come on the price of sometimes not insignificant changes 
in output budget terms. The conversion of FMP2 to a double precision code reduces these budget differences.
Some double precision parameters of other linked packages are used by FMP2 but declared in FORTRAN modules 
external to FMP (e.g. HNEW in BAS7 or WELL2 in MNW7). To be consistent, all FMP2 real(4) 
parameters are now declared as double precision (real(8)) parameters.
All utility read modules used in FMP2 are now in double precision. A new utility read module 
was added (U2DDP; based on U2DREL) to facilitate reading 2d double precision real arrays
(ground-surface elevation, GSURF; reference evapotranspiration flux, ETR; precipitation flux, PFLX).

Double precicision variables do not have a default implicit data type for variables starting 
with particular letters, such as Real(4) variables for variables starting with letters A-H and O-Z. 
Thus in FMP2, default implicit typing generally used in MODFLOW is not  
supported in FMP2 ("implicit none") analogous to other packages that also follow 
this same approach (e.g., SFR7,UZF1,MNW7). Requiring data types to be declared for all variables 
has also the advantage that the compiler produces an error if an undeclared variable were used.

FMP2 was made fully compatible with Fortran 90. For instance, "do loops" referring to the same "CONTINUE,"
arithmetic IF conditions, and "PAUSE" statements were not used. 


  (B) Instances for Farm Wells --

A time-varying parameter is a parameter for which multiple instances can be defined. 
Each instance of a parameter is a different set of data to which the parameter value 
can be applied to construct data values for the cells associated with the parameter; 
however, the same parameter value applies to all instances of a parameter. Only one 
instance of a parameter can be in use during a stress period. The instance being used can 
be changed each stress period. Time-varying parameters have been incorporated into 
MODFLOW-2005 (Harbaugh, 2005) because they make it possible to specify time constraints 
on a parameter when using parameter estimation. A parameter for list data is defined by 
specifying a list of cells and associated data to which the parameter applies. In FMP2, 
the only allowed parameter type is QMAX, which defines values of the volumetric maximum 
well capacity. Each time-varying parameter for list data is defined as having one or more 
instances, where each instance is a list of cells and associated data. Each instance must 
include the same number of cells, but the specific cells can differ among the instances.

In item 3 of the FMP2 input instructions, INSTANCES is an optional keyword that designates 
a parameter as time varying, and if present must be followed by a value for NUMINST, which 
is the number of instances for a time-varying parameter, where, FMP2, each instance is a list 
of wells and associated maximum capacities. After each item 3, for which the keyword INSTANCES 
is entered, item 4a, INSTNAM, the name of an instance associated with the parameter named in 
the corresponding item 3 is read together with the list of wells in item 4b, 
[Layer Row Column Farm-Well-ID Farm-ID QMAXfact] [xyz].

  (C) Land-use processes active for constant head and bottom layer no-flow cells --

Previously, In FMP1, if a cell was constant head or inactive, it was skipped from calculating 
evapotranspiration and recharge and the code moved on to the next horizontal location (for constant head) 
or moved down a layer (for inactive cell), respectively. The calculation of evapotranspiration is 
now allowed to depend on a constant head. A constant head cell is considered non-bedrock aquifer 
that can receive deep percolation as outflow from the Farm Budget. The farm net recharge source/sink 
item (FNRCH) is calculated and its deep percolation and ETgw parts are used for the Farm Budget, 
but FNRCH itself cannot and is not applied to finite difference equation.
The calculation of non-head dependent evapotranspiration components is now allowed over inactive cells. 
The farm net recharge source/sink term (FNRCH) is calculated and its deep percolation part is used as 
Farm Budget outflow. An inactive cell is considered a dry non-bedrock cell if underlain by an active cell, 
that is, if any layer is IBOUND>0 below another layer with IBOUND=0. In this case, the uppermost active 
layer will receive the calculated net recharge, FNRCH. If all layers down to the bottom layer are IBOUND=0, 
FMP2 assumes a bedrock formation throughout all layers. In this case, no layer can receive the 
calculated net recharge, FNRCH, which -- in the absence of ETgw -- is equal to deep percolation. 
Hence, deep percolation is switched to zero, and all inefficient losses will be sent to 
RUNOFF to avoid losing mass in the Farm Budget.

  (D) Acreage Optimization and Efficiency Matrices --

The objective function used an on-farm efficiency parameter to relate both the irrigation requirement for each
cell and the resource constraints only to efficient use. That is the irrigation requirement referred only to a
"crop irrigation requirement (CIR)" and not to the total delivery requirement. Likewise, the available supply from
non-routed deliveries, (semi-)routed deliveries, and groundwater pumping was scaled down to only the availability
for efficient use. In FMP2, the objective function does not use efficiency anymore: For the use of "efficiency
matrices" (Items 7 or 24), the composite efficiency of a farm may be different from the efficiency of particular
cells that remain active after the acreage reduction. That is: The cost of delivery is associated with the
total delivery (FMP2) and not just the efficiently used CIR (FMP1), and resource constraints are related to the 
total available resource (FMP2) and not just the resource available for efficient use (FMP1).

  (E) Cautionary joint use of "Acreage Optimization" (IDEFFL>1) and "Prior Appropriation" (IALLOT>1) --

The total farm delivery requirement and non-routed delivery are recalculated after the evaluation of the 
crop irrigation requirement and total cell delivery requirement, which potentially depend on a cell acreage
adjustment prior to that estimation. A slight discrepancy may occur between streamflow deliveries 
(as itemized in the "STREAM LISTING" output table by "negative runoff" from SFR reaches into farms) and 
(semi-)routed deliveries in the Farm Supply and Demand budget file (FDS.OUT) or in the Farm Budget file (FB_DETAILS.OUT or FB_COMPACT.OUT). 
As the pumping requirement is not allowed to change anymore, changes in demand are reconciled with (slightly) changing (semi)routed deliveries, which,
in turn, are not read back one more time to the SFR package. The joint use of "Acreage Optimization" and "Prior Appropriation" has not been used in any Modflow-FMP model conducted
by the USGS and is still in a testing phase.

  (F) Root Zone Depth Error Fix --

In the previous release, the calculation of a variable root zone depth, RD, (for IRTFL=3) was not calculated
as a function of cumulative growing degree days, CGDD, within the bounds a minimum and maximum rooting depth
(RD = ROOTCG * CGDD, if BEGROOTD < RD < MAXROOTD) and RD was falsely set equal to BEGROOTD.
This compromises the comparison of the hypothetic example model of FMP1 ("example 2") that rests on this
calculation.
In addition, the code and general data input requirements section in FMP1 read or described, respectively,
the data in the following sequence (MAXROOTD, ROOTGC, BEGROOTD). The data input set in "example 2" did follow
this sequence correctly, even though the input data instructions followed another sequence (BEGROOTD, MAXROOTD, ROOTGC).
However, to be consistent with the newly released FMP2 input data instruction, the code was adjusted to the same 
sequence BEGROOTD, MAXROOTD, ROOTGC in Item 15.

  (G) Precision and Accuracy Parameter Specifications in MODULE FMPBLK --

In Module FMPBLK, shared parameters are declared that can optionally be changed by the user if needed:
AC - Accuracy: the exponent is equal to the number of significant digits behind the decimal point (e.g. default is 10 for 1D+10). 
AR - Accuracy: the exponent is equal to the number of significant digits behind the decimal point (e.g. default is 10 for 1E+10).
        AC and AR must be the same.
FPS - Flow Rate Precision (default is 1D-10). Depending on MODFLOW length and time units (LENUNI & ITMUNI). NOTE: Do not increase 
      this  number if units of seconds are used, which results in very small flow rates.
EPS - Precision in Analytical Solution that solves for the reduction of transpiration proportional to the reduction of the active root zone 
      by wilting and anoxia (default is 1D-5). This parameter can optionally be even higher as the analytical solution was derived in centimeters.
TPL - Time below which Time is printed as PG-Format in Farm Supply and Demand and Farm Budget Output lists (default is 1D-10).
TPU - Time above which Time is printed as PG-Format in Farm Supply and Demand and Farm Budget Output lists (default is 1D+7).
OPS - Optimization Precision in Simplex Routine (default is 1D-10).

(2) CHANGES TO OTHER MF2005 PACKAGES --

  (A) Multiplier Package (MULT):

The MULT Package was modified to include exponentiation as an additional binary operator that 
could be performed on scalars or arrays as specified in the MULT Package input. 
The ability to perform exponentiation facilitates the expression of power functions for 
calculating vertical hydraulic conductivities. 
See Appendix B of FMP2 User's Guide (Schmid and Hanson, 2009)

  (B) Time-Series Package (HYDMOD):

The modifications to the HYDMOD Package (Hanson and Leake, 1998) allow the capture of time series 
from the Subsidence Package (SUB) (Hoffmann and others, 2003) and from the SFR2  Packages (Niswonger and 
Prudic, 2005, herein referred to as the SFR2 Package in MF2005). See Appendix B of FMP2 User's Guide 
(Schmid and Hanson, 2009) and HYDMOD update in doc folder (Hydmod7.pdf). In addtion, the HYDMOD now includes the 
capture of Total Instantaneous Compaction or Subsidence and the individual elastic and inelastic components. 
Please refer to the updated description of hydmod in the doc folder (hydmod7.pdf).

  (C) Streamflow Routing Package (SFR2):

The FMP1 release included a modified SFR1 Package (version 1.4) (Prudic and others, 2004) with an additional 
option to compute streambed elevation for reaches of SFR diversion segments, which allows the streambed slope 
to follow the slope of ground surface at a defined depth. This option was invoked by setting the IRDFLG flag = 1 
in the SFR1 input file. Details of these changes were already documented in Schmid and others (2006). These changes 
to SFR1 are independent of the linkage between FMP and SFR and have been consistently applied to an accordingly modified 
version the Streamflow Routing Package for MODFLOW-2005, gwf1sfr7.f (SFR2, Niswonger and Prudic 2006), which is released 
jointly with MF2005-FMP2. See Appendix B of FMP2 User's Guide (Schmid and Hanson, 2009)

The only change made by the authors of the SFR2 Package is that the IRDFLG flag now has to be set to 2 to invoke the 
above described option of smoothing the streambed elevation to the ground-surface elevation at a defined depth:
IRDFLG --	A flag of the SFR2, which normally is used in SFR to specify, whether input data are printed for a particular 
stress period are printed to the list file or not. IRDFLG can also be used to define the method of calculation for the 
elevation of the midpoint of a diversion segment reach. The choice of setting IRDFLG = 2 is an addendum to the GWF1SFR7 
code and, therefore, is only described here and not in the SFR2 input instructions (Niswonger and Prudic, 2006, p.27). 
The user is referred to the SFR2 input instructions regarding the location of the IRDFLG flag, which is part of the SFR2 
data input block that is read for each stress period.

0 = input data for this stress period will be printed. Elevation of top of streambed of diversion segments (canals/laterals) is 
	interpolated between elevation of upstream and downstream ends of segments, as specified in SFR input file (SFR2 input 
	data for a stress period are printed to the list file).
1 = input data for this stress period will not be printed. Elevation of top of streambed of diversion segments (canals/laterals) 
	is interpolated between elevation of upstream and downstream ends of segments, as specified in SFR input file (SFR2 input 
	data for a stress period are printed to the list file).
2 = input data for this stress period will not be printed. Streamflow Routed through a Conveyance Network to a Farm (only if SFR 
	is specified in Name File). Elevation of top of streambed of all segments that are not diversion segments is interpolated 
	between the elevation of the upstream and downstream ends of the segments, as specified in SFR input file. Elevation of top 
	of streambed of diversion segments (canals/laterals) follows the slope of ground surface at a depth defined by the interpolation 
	of:
	(1) the difference between the ground surface elevation and the elevation of the upstream end of a diversion segment, 
		as specified in the SFR input file; and
	(2) the difference between the ground surface elevation and the elevation of the downstream end of a diversion segment, 
		as specified in the SFR input file. Note limitation: IRDFLG ??2 cannot be chosen if the number of the diversion 
		segment is equal to the total number of segments.

  (D) Unsaturated Zone Flow Package (UZF1):

UZF1 offers the option to write unformatted cell-by-cell rates of actual infiltration, ground-water recharge, evapotranspiration, 
and groundwater discharge to land surface to a unit number specified in IUZFCB2 (for IUZFCB2>0, and when "SAVE BUDGET" is 
specified in Output Control). See Appendix B of FMP2 User's Guide (Schmid and Hanson, 2009)

For the consistent use of MODFLOW’s ZONEBUDGET (Harbaugh, 1990) of budget terms into and out of groundwater zones, in the 
MF2005-FMP2 release, the UZF1-generated actual-infiltration term was prevented from being written to cell-by-cell rates to the 
unit number specified in IUZFCB2 when "COMPACT BUDGET" is specified in the Name File.

  (E) Subsidence Package (SUB):

SUB offers the option to write formatted and unformatted total compaction and subsidence for non-delay and delayed 
beds (Hoffmann and others, 2003).  These output options were expanded to facilitate the option to provide separate output 
of elastic and inelastic compaction and subsidence for no-delay within model layers and delayed compation within interbed systems. 
In addition, separate input for initial compaction for elastic and inelastic components has been included for each model layer. 
The changes to the input include replacing the single array of intial compaction for each model layer with an elastic and inelastic 
compaction specification for each model layer. The additional input variables and instructions for the initial compaction are 
summarized in the following revised input instructions and Table B1 of Appendix B of FMP2 User's Guide (Schmid and Hanson, 2009).