U.S. Geological Survey (USGS)                               MF2005-FMP2

NOTE: Any use of trade, product or firm names is for descriptive purposes
      only and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Government.

NAME
     MF2005-FMP2 - Modular three-dimensional finite-difference ground-water
               model (MODFLOW-2005 ver 1.6.01) with the Farm Process

ABSTRACT
     The ability to dynamically simulate the integrated supply-and-demand 
     components of irrigated agricultural is needed to thoroughly understand 
     the interrelation between surface water and groundwater flow in areas where 
     the water-use by vegetation is an important component of the water budget. 
     To meet this need, the computer program Farm Process (FMP1) was updated and 
     refined for use with the U.S. Geological Survey’s MODFLOW-2005 groundwater-flow model, 
     and is referred to as MF2005-FMP2. The updated program allows the simulation, 
     analysis, and management of nearly all components of human and natural water use. 
     MF2005-FMP2 represents a complete hydrologic model that fully links the movement 
     and use of groundwater, surface water, and imported water for water consumption 
     of irrigated agriculture, but also of urban use, and of natural vegetation. Supply 
     and demand components of water use are analyzed under demand-driven and supply-constrained 
     conditions. From large- to small-scale settings, the MF2005-FMP2 has the unique set of 
     capabilities to simulate and analyze historical, present, and future conditions. 
     MF2005-FMP2 facilitates the analysis of agricultural water use where little data 
     is available for pumpage, land use, or agricultural information. The features presented 
     in this new version of FMP2 along with the linkages to the Streamflow Routing (SFR), 
     Multi-Node Well (MNW), and Unsaturated Zone Flow (UZF) Packages prevents mass loss to 
     an open system and helps to account for "all of the water everywhere and all of the time."
     
     The first version, FMP1 for MODFLOW-2000, is limited to (a) transpiration uptake from 
     unsaturated root zones, (b) on-farm efficiency defined solely by farm and not by crop type, 
     (c) a simulation of water use and returnflows related only to irrigated agriculture and not 
     also to non-irrigated vegetation, (d) a definition of consumptive use as potential crop 
     evapotranspiration, (e) percolation being instantly recharged to the uppermost active aquifer, 
     (f) automatic routing of returnflow from runoff either to reaches of tributary stream segments 
     adjacent to a farm or to one reach nearest to the farm’s lowest elevation, (g) farm-well pumping 
     from cell locations regardless of whether an irrigation requirement from these cells exists or not, 
     and (h) specified non-routed water transfers from an undefined source outside the model domain.
     
     All of these limitations are overcome in MF2005-FMP2. The new features include (a) simulation 
     of transpiration uptake from variably saturated, fully saturated, or ponded root zones (for example, 
     for crops like rice or riparian vegetation), (b) definition of on-farm efficiency not only by farm 
     but also by crop, (c) simulation of water use and returnflow from non-irrigated vegetation (for 
     example, rain-fed agriculture or native vegetation), (d) use of crop coefficients and reference 
     evapotranspiration, (e) simulation of the delay between percolation from farms through the unsaturated 
     zone and recharge into the uppermost active aquifer by linking FMP2 to the UZF Package, (f) an option 
     to manually control the routing of returnflow from farm runoff to streams, (g) an option to limit 
     pumping to wells located only in cells where an irrigation requirement exists, and (h) simulation 
     of water transfers to farms from a series of well fields (for example, recovery well field of an 
     aquifer-storage-and-recovery system, ASR).
     
     In addition to the output of an economic budget for each farm between irrigation demand and supply 
     ("Farm Demand and Supply Budget" in FMP1), a new output option called "Farm Budget" was created 
     for FMP2, which allows the user to track all physical flows into and out of a water accounting 
     unit at all times. Such a unit can represent individual farms, farming districts, natural areas, 
     or urban areas.
     
     The example model demonstrates the application of MF2005-FMP2 with delayed recharge through 
     an unsaturated zone, rejected infiltration in a riparian area, changes in demand owing to 
     deficiency in supply, and changes in multi-aquifer pumpage owing to constraints imposed through 
     the Farm Process and the MNW Package.

METHOD
     The ground-water flow equation is solved using the finite-difference
     approximation.  The flow region is subdivided into blocks in which
     the medium properties are assumed to be uniform.  In plan view the
     blocks are made from a grid of mutually perpendicular lines that may
     be variably spaced.  Model layers can have varying thickness.  A flow
     equation is written for each block, called a cell.  Several solvers
     are provided for solving the resulting matrix problem; the user can
     choose the best solver for the particular problem.  Flow-rate and
     cumulative-volume balances from each type of inflow and outflow are
     computed for each time step.


HISTORY
      MF2005-FMP2 Version 1.0.00 MODFLOW-2005 Version 1.6.01 (3/4/2009)  
          with the Farm Process Version 2.0 with modifications to the MULT,
          HYDMOD, SFR, UZF, and SUB Packages.


DATA REQUIREMENTS
     In order to use MODFLOW, initial conditions, hydraulic properties,
     and stresses must be specified for every model cell in the finite-
     difference grid. Input data are read from files.


SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS
     MODFLOW-2005 is written primarily in Fortran 90. Only the GMG solver
     package is written in C.  The code has been used on UNIX-based
     computers and personal computers running various forms of the Microsoft
     Windows operating system.


FUNTIONALITY
     This version of MODFLOW includes the following functionality that is
     documented in Harbaugh (2005).

         BAS -- Basic Package
         BCF -- Block-Centered Flow Package
         LPF -- Layer-Property Flow Package
         HFB -- Horizontal Flow Barrier Package
         CHD -- Time-Variant Specified-Head Option
         RIV -- River Package
         DRN -- Drain Package
         WEL -- Well Package
         GHB -- General Head Boundary Package
         RCH -- Recharge Package
         EVT -- Evapotranspiration Package
         SIP -- Strongly Implicit Procedure Package
         PCG -- Preconditioned Conjugate Gradient Package
         DE4 -- Direct solver

      The following functionality is also included. This functionality is
      documented in separate reports for use in earlier versions of MODFLOW.
      Conversion of this functionality to work with MF2005-FMP2 is
      documented in separate files that are provided with the MF2005-FMP2
      distribution.
         STR -- Streamflow-Routing Package
         FHB -- Flow and Head Boundary Package
         IBS -- Interbed Storage Package
         HUF -- Hydrogeologic-Unit Flow Package
         MNW -- Multi-Node Well Package
         ETS -- Evapotranspiration with a Segmented Function Package
         DRT -- Drains with Return Flow Package
         RES -- Reservoir Package
         SUB -- Subsidence Package
         OBS -- Observation Process
         SFR -- Streamflow-Routing Package
         LAK -- Lake Package
         UZF -- Unsaturated Zone Package
         GAG -- Gage Package
         SWT -- Subsidence and Aquifer-System Compaction Package +/- Water Table Conditions
         LMT -- Link to the MT3DMS contaminant-transport model
         HYD -- HYDMOD Hydrograph capability for groundwater, surface-water, and subsidence time-series data

Unlike MF2000-FMP1, MF2005-FMP2 does not support a parameter-estimation
process. Users of MF2005-FMP2 are encouraged to take advantage of
'clip-on' parameter-estimation programs such as UCODE_2005. UCODE_2005 and
supporting documentation are available at:
         http://typhoon.mines.edu/freeware/ucode/

DOCUMENTATION

  The basic documentation for MODFLOW-2005 is contained in:

Harbaugh, A.W., 2005, MODFLOW-2005, the U.S. Geological Survey modular
ground-water model -- the Ground-Water Flow Process: U.S. Geological Survey
Techniques and Methods 6-A16, variously p.

  The FMP Process is documented in:

Schmid, W., Hanson, R.T., Maddock III, T.M., and Leake, S.A., 2006, 
User’s guide for the Farm Package (FMP1) for the U.S. Geological Survey’s 
modular three-dimensional finite-difference ground-water flow model, MODFLOW-2000: 
U.S. Geological Survey Techniques and Scientific Methods Report Book 6, Chapter A17, 
127p. (http://pubs.usgs.gov/tm/2006/tm6A17/)

Schmid, Wolfgang, and Hanson R.T., 2009, The Farm Process Version 2 (FMP2) for 
MODFLOW-2005 - Modifications and Upgrades to FMP1: U.S. Geological Survey Techniques 
in Water Resources Investigations, Book 6, Chapter A32, 102p. (http://pubs.usgs.gov/tm/tm6a32/)

  The STR Package is documented in:

Prudic, D.E., 1989, Documentation of a computer program to simulate
stream-aquifer relations using a modular, finite-difference, ground-water
flow model: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 88-729, 113 p.

  The FHB Package is documented in:

Leake, S.A., and Lilly, M.R., 1997, Documentation of a computer program
(FHB1) for assignment of transient specified-flow and specified-head
boundaries in applications of the modular finite- difference ground-water
flow model (MODFLOW): U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 97-571, 50 p.

  The IBS Package is documented in:

Leake, S.A. and Prudic, D.E., 1991, Documentation of a computer program
to simulate aquifer-system compaction using the modular
finite-difference ground-water flow model: U.S. Geological Survey
Techniques of Water-Resources Investigations, Book 6, Chapter A2, 68 p.

  The HUF Package is documented in:

Anderman, E.R., and Hill, M.C., 2000, MODFLOW-2000, the U.S. Geological
Survey modular ground-water model -- Documentation of the Hydrogeologic-
Unit Flow (HUF) Package: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 00-342,
89 p.
     
Anderman, E.R., Kipp, K.L., Hill, M.C., Valstar, Johan, and Neupauer,
R.M., 2002, MODFLOW-2000, the U.S. Geological Survey modular ground-water
model -- Documentation of the Model-Layer Variable-Direction Horizontal
Anisotropy (LVDA) capability of the Hydrogeologic-Unit Flow (HUF) Package:
U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 02-409, 60 p.

Anderman, E.R., and Hill, M.C., 2003, MODFLOW-2000, the U.S. Geological
Survey modular ground-water model -- Three additions to the
Hydrogeologic-Unit Flow (HUF) Package: Alternative storage for the
uppermost active cells, Flows in hydrogeologic units, and the
Hydraulic-coductivity depth-dependence (KDEP) capability:U.S. Geological
Survey Open-File Report 03-347, 36 p.

  The MNW Package is documented in:

Halford, K.J. and Hanson, R.T., 2002, User guide for the drawdown-limited,
multi-node well (MNW) package for the U.S. Geological Survey's modular
three-dimensional finite-difference ground-water flow model, versions
MODFLOW-96 and MODFLOW-2000: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report
02-293, 33 p.

  The DRT and ETS Packages are documented in:

Banta, E.R., 2000, MODFLOW-2000, the U.S. Geological Survey modular
ground-water model -- documentation of packages for simulating
evapotranspiration with a segmented function (ETS1) and drains with return
flow (DRT1): U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 00-466, 127 p.

  The RES Package is documented in:

Fenske, J.P., Leake, S.A., and Prudic, D.E., 1996, Documentation of a
computer program (RES1) to simulate leakage from reservoirs using the
modular finite-difference ground-water flow model (MODFLOW): U.S.
Geological Survey Open-File Report 96-364, 51 p.

  The SUB Package is documented in:

Hoffmann, Jorn, Leake, S.A., Galloway, D.L., and Wilson, A.M., 2003,
MODFLOW-2000 ground-water model -- User guide to the Subsidence and
Aquifer-System Compaction (SUB) Package: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File
Report 03-233, 46 p.

  The OBS Process is documented in:
  
Hill, M.C., Banta, E.R., Harbaugh, A.W., and Anderman, E.R., 2000,
MODFLOW-2000, the U.S. Geological Survey modular ground-water model --
User guide to the Observation, Sensitivity, and Parameter-Estimation
Processes and three post-processing programs: U.S. Geological Survey
Open-File Report 00-184, 209 p.

See file obs.pdf for documentation of the OBS Process in MODFLOW-2005,
including input instructions.

  The SFR Package is documented in:

Prudic, D.E., Konikow, L.F., and Banta, E.R., A new Streamflow-Routing
(SFR1) Package to simulate stream-aquifer interaction with MODFLOW-2000:
U.S. Geological Survey Open File Report 2004-1042, 95 p.

Niswonger, R.G., and Prudic, D.E., 2005, Documentation of the
Streamflow-Routing (SFR2) Package to include unsaturated flow beneath
streams -- a modification to SFR1: U.S. Geological Techniques and Methods
Book 6, Chapter A13, 47 p.

  The UZF Package is documented in:

Niswonger, R.G., Prudic, D.E., and Regan, R.S., 2006, Documentation of
the Unsaturated-Zone Flow (UZF1) Package for modeling unsaturated flow
between the land surface and the water table with MODFLOW-2005: U.S.
Geological Techniques and Methods Book 6, Chapter A19, 62 p.
  
  The LAK Package is documented in:
  
Merritt, M.L., and Konikow, L.F., 2000, Documentation of a computer
program to simulate lake-aquifer interaction using the MODFLOW ground-water
flow model and the MOC3D solute-transport model: Water-Resources
Investigations Report 00-4167, 146 p.

  The GAG Package is documented as part of the above SFR and LAK
  documentation.

  The SWT Package is documented in:
  
Leake, S.A. and Galloway, D.L., 2007, MODFLOW ground-water model -- User
guide to the Subsidence and Aquifer-System Compaction Package (SUB-WT) for
water-table aquifers: U.S. Geological Survey Techniques and Methods 6-A23,
42 p.

  The LMT Package is documented in:
  
Zheng, Chunmiao, Hill, M.C., and Hsieh, P.A., 2001, MODFLOW-2000, the U.S.
Geological Survey modular ground-water model - User guide to the LMT6
package, the linkage with MT3DMS for multi-species mass transport modeling:
U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 01-82, 43 p.

   HYDMOD is documented in:

Hanson, R.T. and Leake, S.A., 1999, Documentation of HYDMOD, a program for
extracting and processing time-series data from the U.S. Geological
Survey's modular three-dimensional finite-difference ground-water flow
model: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 98-564, 57 p.

A separate file, hydmod7.pdf, documents the conversion for MODFLOW-2005.


CONTACTS
    U.S. Geological Survey
    Office of Ground Water
    411 National Center
    Reston, VA 20192
    (703) 648-5001
    ogw_webmaster@usgs.gov

    See

      http://water.usgs.gov/software/ordering_documentation.html

    for information on ordering printed copies of USGS publications.